.\" Man page for check-unicode
.\" Generate with: man ./docs/check-unicode.1
.TH CHECK\-UNICODE 1 "2026-02-28" "check-unicode 0.5.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
check\-unicode \- detect and fix non\-ASCII Unicode characters in text files
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B check\-unicode
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.IR FILE ...
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B check\-unicode
scans text files for non\-ASCII Unicode characters and reports their location,
codepoint, name, and category.
It is designed to catch copy\-paste artifacts such as smart quotes, em dashes,
fancy spaces, and dangerous invisible characters
(Trojan Source bidi attacks, zero\-width chars).
.PP
In
.B \-\-fix
mode it replaces known offenders with ASCII equivalents.
Dangerous invisible characters are never auto\-fixed and always require manual
review.
.PP
.B check\-unicode
is commonly used as a
.BR pre\-commit (1)
hook but also works as a standalone CLI tool.
.
.SH POSITIONAL ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I FILE ...
One or more files to check.
At least one file is required; the program exits with code\ 2 if none are
provided.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Mode
.TP
.B \-\-fix
Replace known offenders (smart quotes, en/em dashes, fancy spaces, ellipsis)
with their ASCII equivalents using an atomic write (temp file + rename).
Exits\ 1 if any file was modified.
Dangerous invisible characters are never auto\-fixed.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the program version and exit.
.
.SS Allow\-list options
These flags suppress findings for specific characters.
They extend (never replace) any values set in the config file.
Dangerous invisible characters are always flagged unless explicitly allowed by
.BR \-\-allow\-codepoint .
.TP
.BI \-\-allow\-range " RANGE"
Allow a Unicode range.
The format is
.IR U+XXXX\-U+YYYY .
May be repeated for multiple ranges.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.B \-\-allow\-range U+00A0\-U+00FF
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-allow\-codepoint " CP"
Allow specific Unicode codepoints.
Accepts
.I U+XXXX
notation, comma\-separated and/or repeated.
This is the
.B only
flag that can suppress dangerous invisible characters.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.B \-\-allow\-codepoint U+00B0,U+00A9
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-allow\-category " CAT"
Allow a Unicode general category.
May be repeated for multiple categories.
Use
.B \-\-list\-categories
to see all valid values.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.B \-\-allow\-category Sc
(Symbol, currency)
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-printable
Allow all printable non\-ASCII characters.
Only invisible and control characters will be flagged.
.TP
.BI \-\-allow\-script " SCRIPT"
Allow all characters from a Unicode script.
May be repeated.
Script names are case\-insensitive and normalized to title case.
Use
.B \-\-list\-scripts
to see all valid names.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.B \-\-allow\-script Cyrillic \-\-allow\-script Greek
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-list\-categories
Print all 30 Unicode general categories with descriptions and examples,
then exit.
Useful for discovering valid values for
.BR \-\-allow\-category .
.TP
.B \-\-list\-scripts
Print all known Unicode script names, then exit.
Useful for discovering valid values for
.BR \-\-allow\-script .
.
.SS Detection options
.TP
.B \-\-check\-confusables
Detect mixed\-script homoglyph/confusable characters, such as a Cyrillic
.B a
(U+0430) mixed into a Latin identifier.
This check is
.B not
suppressed by
.BR \-\-allow\-script .
.
.SS Output options
.TP
.BI \-\-severity " LEVEL"
Set exit\-code behavior.
.I LEVEL
must be
.B error
(exit\ 1 on findings) or
.B warning
(print findings but exit\ 0).
Default:
.BR error .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color output.
Color is also disabled when the
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable is set or stdout is not a TTY.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Print the summary line only; suppress per\-finding details.
.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.BI \-\-config " FILE"
Path to a TOML config file.
If omitted, the program auto\-discovers
.I .check\-unicode.toml
in the current directory, or
.I [tool.check\-unicode]
in
.IR pyproject.toml .
.TP
.BI \-\-exclude\-pattern " PATTERN"
Exclude files matching a glob pattern.
May be repeated.
Extends any
.B exclude\-patterns
set in the config file.
Patterns are matched against both the full path and the basename.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.B \-\-exclude\-pattern '*.min.js' \-\-exclude\-pattern 'vendor/*'
.RE
.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
Settings can be stored in
.I .check\-unicode.toml
(standalone) or under the
.B [tool.check\-unicode]
table in
.IR pyproject.toml .
CLI flags always extend config\-file values; they never replace them.
.PP
.nf
.RS
[tool.check\-unicode]
allow\-codepoints  = ["U+00B0", "U+2192"]
allow\-ranges      = ["U+00A0\-U+00FF"]
allow\-categories  = ["Sc"]
allow\-printable   = true
allow\-scripts     = ["Latin", "Cyrillic"]
check\-confusables = true
severity          = "error"
exclude\-patterns  = ["*.min.js", "vendor/*"]
.RE
.fi
.PP
Per\-file overrides can be added with
.B [[tool.check\-unicode.overrides]]
sections.
Each entry requires a
.B files
key containing a list of glob patterns.
Allow\-list options
.RB ( allow\-codepoints ", " allow\-ranges ", " allow\-categories ", "
.BR allow\-printable ", " allow\-scripts )
are
.B additive
\(em they merge with the global config.
.B severity
and
.B check\-confusables
.B replace
the global value for matching files.
.PP
.nf
.RS
[[tool.check\-unicode.overrides]]
files             = ["docs/*.md", "*.rst"]
allow\-printable   = true
severity          = "warning"

[[tool.check\-unicode.overrides]]
files             = ["i18n/**"]
allow\-scripts     = ["Cyrillic", "Han"]
check\-confusables = false
.RE
.fi
.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
No findings were detected, or all findings came from files whose effective
severity is
.BR warning
(set globally via
.B \-\-severity
or per\-file via overrides).
.TP
.B 1
Non\-ASCII findings were detected, or files were modified in
.B \-\-fix
mode.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (invalid arguments, no files specified, etc.).
.
.SH WHAT IT CATCHES
.SS Copy\-paste artifacts (fixable with \-\-fix)
.TP
.B Smart quotes
\(lq\(rq \(oq\(cq and variants \(-> replaced with ASCII quotes
.TP
.B Dashes
Em dash (U+2014), en dash (U+2013), minus sign (U+2212) \(-> replaced with
.B \-\-
or
.BR \- .
.TP
.B Fancy spaces
Non\-breaking space, em space, thin space, and 14 other Unicode space characters
\(-> replaced with a regular space.
.TP
.B Ellipsis
Horizontal ellipsis (U+2026) \(-> replaced with
.BR ... .
.
.SS Dangerous invisible characters (never auto\-fixed)
.TP
.B Bidi controls (Trojan Source CVE\-2021\-42574)
U+202A\-202E (embedding/override), U+2066\-2069 (isolate).
These can make source code appear to do something different from what it
actually does.
.TP
.B Zero\-width characters
U+200B\-200F, U+FEFF (mid\-file BOM), U+2060\-2064, U+180E.
Invisible characters that can break identifiers or hide malicious code.
.TP
.B Replacement character
U+FFFD, usually indicates an encoding error.
.
.SS Confusable homoglyphs (with \-\-check\-confusables)
Mixed\-script identifiers where minority\-script characters visually resemble
Latin letters (e.g.\& Cyrillic
.I a
U+0430 in a Latin word).
.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
For each finding, the program prints the file, line, column, codepoint,
Unicode name, and general category:
.PP
.nf
.RS
path/to/file.txt:42:17: U+201C LEFT DOUBLE QUOTATION MARK [Ps]
  He said \(lqhello\(rq to the crowd
          ^
.RE
.fi
.PP
After all findings, a summary line is printed:
.PP
.nf
.RS
Found 5 non\-ASCII characters in 2 files (3 fixable, 1 dangerous)
.RE
.fi
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set (to any value), ANSI color output is disabled.
See
.IR https://no\-color.org/ .
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Check all Python files in a project:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode src/**/*.py
.RE
.PP
Auto\-fix smart quotes and dashes:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-fix *.txt
.RE
.PP
Allow printable characters, flag only invisibles:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-allow\-printable src/
.RE
.PP
Detect confusables while allowing Cyrillic script:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-check\-confusables \-\-allow\-script Cyrillic src/
.RE
.PP
Warn without failing CI, disable color:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-severity warning \-\-no\-color src/
.RE
.PP
List all valid Unicode script names:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-list\-scripts
.RE
.PP
List all valid Unicode general categories:
.PP
.RS
.B check\-unicode \-\-list\-categories
.RE
.PP
Use with pre\-commit:
.PP
.nf
.RS
repos:
  \- repo: https://github.com/mit\-d/check\-unicode
    rev: v0.5.0
    hooks:
      \- id: check\-unicode
      # or for auto\-fix:
      \- id: fix\-unicode
.RE
.fi
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pre\-commit (1),
.BR python3 (1),
.BR unicode (7)
.PP
Project repository:
.I https://github.com/mit\-d/check\-unicode
.
.SH AUTHORS
mit\-d <derekmttn@gmail.com>
.
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
See the
.I LICENSE
file in the source distribution.
